README.md, before:

# UNHCR-ml-challenge
Code repository for the UNHCR's Artificial Intelligence for Operation Support to the Forcible Displaced Challenge.

## Abstract
Our problem addresses the humanitarian crisis in Somalia related to refugee movements and forcibly displaced people. The ability to accurately predict patterns in forcibly displaced peoples movements is crucial to the development of public policies that provide aid and resources to refugees. We plan to focus on building a model trained on GIS data covering Somalia’s environment, economy, and stability provided by UNHCR. By looking at a variety of conditions affecting human movement, we seek to predict where people might move, either forcibly or voluntarily.bA successful model will be able to accurately predict where people are moving from due to a variety of factors like instability, drought, or economics. 

## Motivation and Question
We are curious about how certain environmental factors like drought or vegetation affect human movement. UNHCR’s extensive dataset allows us to answer this question due to its NDVI (normalized difference vegetation index) allows us to effectively investigate these questions. Ultimately, the model could help inform UN operations where people might be displaced and where people might move to. This information allows humanitarian efforts to effectively reach refugees by helping organizations plan their relief efforts based on the predicted change in the number of displaced people in a particular area.

## Planned Deliverables
We will develop a trained model, in the form of a Python package, that will predict forcibly displaced persons movement using GIS data. This package will contain the model class itself and all of the methods related to training the model and running inferences with the model. We will additionally create a Jupyter notebook to illustrate patterns in the data and demonstrate model predictions. If everything works out, we will deliver the trained model and a notebook demonstrating its accuracy and effectiveness. A partial success would be still delivering a trained model, but just one that is not as effective or accurate as we may have hoped. 

### Written Deliverables
You’ll also write a blog post on your project; you don’t have to discuss this post in your proposal though.

## Resources Required
The most important resource we will need for this project is good data. We plan to use GIS datasets from the [UNHCR’s operation data portal](https://data.unhcr.org/en/geoservices/). There are many different datasets available that we may incorporate, but we will probably use the Population Reference Points and Populations Reference Areas datasets, among others. While we are not set on the model we will use, it is unlikely to be a deep-learning model, therefore access to compute resources will likely not be needed. If they are, however, I (Jamie) already have access to ada, so we can run some training on there if needed.

## What You Will Learn
Mihir: I decided to focus on the implementation of machine learning algorithms as well as machine learning’s social impact. This project allows me to work on implementing machine learning algorithms designed to take in GIS data as well as also focus on developing a data pipeline that effectively cleans the data since much of what is collected cannot just be fit neatly into a machine learning model. Meanwhile, I also said I was interested in how machine learning can be used for a positive social impact. This project will allow me to consider how that may be true as well as consider important ethical questions related to the application of machine learning for humanitarian causes.

## Risk Statement
What are two things that could potentially stop you from achieving the full deliverable above? Maybe it turns out that the pattern you thought would be present in the data just doesn’t exist? Or maybe your idea requires more computational power than is available to you? What particular risks might be applicable for your project?

## Ethics Statement
All projects we undertake involve decisions about whose interests matter; which problems are important; and which tradeoffs are considered acceptable. Take some time to reflect on the potential impacts of your project on its prospective users and the broader world. Address the following questions:

1. What groups of people have the potential to **benefit** from our project?
2. What groups of people have the potential to be **excluded from benefit** or even **harmed** from our project?
3. Will the world become an **overall better place** because we made our project? Describe at least 2 **assumptions** behind your answer. For example, if your project aims to make it easier to predict crime, your assumptions might include:
  - Criminal activity is predictable based on other features of a person or location.
  - The world is a better place when police are able to perform their roles more efficiently.

If your project involves making decisions or recommendations, then you will also need to consider possible forms of algorithmic bias in your work. Here are some relevant examples:

A recipe recommendation app can privilege the cuisines of some locales over others. Will your user search recipes by ingredients? Peanut butter and tomato might seem an odd combination in the context of European cuisine, but is common in many traditional dishes of the African diaspora. A similar set of questions applies to recommendation systems related to style or beauty.
A sentiment analyzer must be trained on specific languages. What languages will be included? Will diverse dialects be included, or only the “standard” version of the target language? Who would be excluded by such a choice, and how will you communicate about your limitations?

## Tentative Timeline
We will have a checkpoint for the project in Week 9 or 10, and then final presentations in Week 12. With this in mind, please describe what you expect to achieve after **three** and **six**. Your goal by the three-week check-in should be to have “something that works.” For example, maybe in three weeks you’ll ready to demonstrate the data acquisition pipeline and show some exploratory analysis, and in the last couple weeks you’ll actually implement your machine learning models.

Commit message:

add what you will learn section

README.md, after:

# UNHCR-ml-challenge
Code repository for the UNHCR's Artificial Intelligence for Operation Support to the Forcible Displaced Challenge.

## Abstract
Our problem addresses the humanitarian crisis in Somalia related to refugee movements and forcibly displaced people. The ability to accurately predict patterns in forcibly displaced peoples movements is crucial to the development of public policies that provide aid and resources to refugees. We plan to focus on building a model trained on GIS data covering Somalia’s environment, economy, and stability provided by UNHCR. By looking at a variety of conditions affecting human movement, we seek to predict where people might move, either forcibly or voluntarily.bA successful model will be able to accurately predict where people are moving from due to a variety of factors like instability, drought, or economics. 

## Motivation and Question
We are curious about how certain environmental factors like drought or vegetation affect human movement. UNHCR’s extensive dataset allows us to answer this question due to its NDVI (normalized difference vegetation index) allows us to effectively investigate these questions. Ultimately, the model could help inform UN operations where people might be displaced and where people might move to. This information allows humanitarian efforts to effectively reach refugees by helping organizations plan their relief efforts based on the predicted change in the number of displaced people in a particular area.

## Planned Deliverables
We will develop a trained model, in the form of a Python package, that will predict forcibly displaced persons movement using GIS data. This package will contain the model class itself and all of the methods related to training the model and running inferences with the model. We will additionally create a Jupyter notebook to illustrate patterns in the data and demonstrate model predictions. If everything works out, we will deliver the trained model and a notebook demonstrating its accuracy and effectiveness. A partial success would be still delivering a trained model, but just one that is not as effective or accurate as we may have hoped. 

### Written Deliverables
You’ll also write a blog post on your project; you don’t have to discuss this post in your proposal though.

## Resources Required
The most important resource we will need for this project is good data. We plan to use GIS datasets from the [UNHCR’s operation data portal](https://data.unhcr.org/en/geoservices/). There are many different datasets available that we may incorporate, but we will probably use the Population Reference Points and Populations Reference Areas datasets, among others. While we are not set on the model we will use, it is unlikely to be a deep-learning model, therefore access to compute resources will likely not be needed. If they are, however, I (Jamie) already have access to ada, so we can run some training on there if needed.

## What You Will Learn
**Mihir:** I decided to focus on the implementation of machine learning algorithms as well as machine learning’s social impact. This project allows me to work on implementing machine learning algorithms designed to take in GIS data as well as also focus on developing a data pipeline that effectively cleans the data since much of what is collected cannot just be fit neatly into a machine learning model. Meanwhile, I also said I was interested in how machine learning can be used for a positive social impact. This project will allow me to consider how that may be true as well as consider important ethical questions related to the application of machine learning for humanitarian causes.

**Jamie:** A lot of the goals I set for myself at the beginning of the semester were focused on improving my theoretical understanding of machine learning models, which this project does not focus much on. That said, I think I have developed that understanding a lot in other aspects of the course, and for this project I am interested in developing better practical skills related to model implementation. By doing so, I hope learn about the practical aspects of implementing a model on real world data, especially as it relates to cleaning data and evaluating the model.

## Risk Statement
What are two things that could potentially stop you from achieving the full deliverable above? Maybe it turns out that the pattern you thought would be present in the data just doesn’t exist? Or maybe your idea requires more computational power than is available to you? What particular risks might be applicable for your project?

## Ethics Statement
All projects we undertake involve decisions about whose interests matter; which problems are important; and which tradeoffs are considered acceptable. Take some time to reflect on the potential impacts of your project on its prospective users and the broader world. Address the following questions:

1. What groups of people have the potential to **benefit** from our project?
2. What groups of people have the potential to be **excluded from benefit** or even **harmed** from our project?
3. Will the world become an **overall better place** because we made our project? Describe at least 2 **assumptions** behind your answer. For example, if your project aims to make it easier to predict crime, your assumptions might include:
  - Criminal activity is predictable based on other features of a person or location.
  - The world is a better place when police are able to perform their roles more efficiently.

If your project involves making decisions or recommendations, then you will also need to consider possible forms of algorithmic bias in your work. Here are some relevant examples:

A recipe recommendation app can privilege the cuisines of some locales over others. Will your user search recipes by ingredients? Peanut butter and tomato might seem an odd combination in the context of European cuisine, but is common in many traditional dishes of the African diaspora. A similar set of questions applies to recommendation systems related to style or beauty.
A sentiment analyzer must be trained on specific languages. What languages will be included? Will diverse dialects be included, or only the “standard” version of the target language? Who would be excluded by such a choice, and how will you communicate about your limitations?

## Tentative Timeline
We will have a checkpoint for the project in Week 9 or 10, and then final presentations in Week 12. With this in mind, please describe what you expect to achieve after **three** and **six**. Your goal by the three-week check-in should be to have “something that works.” For example, maybe in three weeks you’ll ready to demonstrate the data acquisition pipeline and show some exploratory analysis, and in the last couple weeks you’ll actually implement your machine learning models.
